#19:  added user guide and developer guide (#39)
exasol/script-languages-developer-sandbox: doc/developer_guide/developer_guide.md

# Script-Languages-Developer-Sandbox Developer Guide

## Requirements

This package requires:
* Python (>=3.8)
* Poetry (>=1.2.0)
* Docker (for integration tests)
* AWS CLI

## Setup

### Install githooks

Run the following command before development.

```shell
cd githooks
bash install.sh
```

## Design Goals:

> We use AWS as backend, because it provides the possibility to run the whole workflow during a ci-test.

Reviewer: With the term "we" I always feel a little bit uncomfortable. Could you explicitly name a user group? 
You could also simply use your project as an "acting person": 
> script-languages-developer-sandbox uses AWS as backend.

Or phrase it as a decision made by the developers: 
> The developers chose AWS as backend, because ......

Author: changed it.

This project uses 
- `boto3` to interact with AWS
- `pygithub` to interact with the Github releases
- `ansible-runner` to interact with Ansible.  
Proxy classes to those projects are injected at the CLI layer. This allows to inject mock classes in the unit tests. 
A CLI command has normally a respective function in the `lib` submodule. Hence, the CLI layer should not contain any logic, but invoke the respective library function only. Also, the proxy classes which abstract the dependant packages shall not contain too much logic. Ideally they should invoke only one function to the respective package.

## Commands

There are generally three types of commands:
- Those which are used during the release (release commands)
- Those which can be used to deploy infrastructure onto AWS (deployment commands)

> - Those which can be used to identify problems or to test new/existing functionality (development commands)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are generally three types of commands:
| Type | Explanation | 
| ----- | --------- |
| Release Commands | used during the release | 
| Deployment Commands | used to deploy infrastructure onto AWS cloud | 
| Development Commands | used to identify problems or for testing | 
```

### Release commands

> The followinds commands are used during the release AWS Codebuild job:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following commands are used during the release AWS Codebuild job:
```

- `create-vm` - creates a new AMI and VM images
- `update-release` - updates release notes of an existing Github release

> - `start-release-build` - starts the AWS release codebuild 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `start-release-build` - starts the release on AWS codebuild 
```

### Developer commands

> All other commands provide a subset of the features of the release commands, and can be use to identify problems or simulate the release provide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All other commands provide a subset of the features of the release commands, and can be used to identify problems or simulate the release:
```

- `export-vm` - creates a new VM image from a running EC2-Instance
- `install-dependencies` - starts an ansible-installation onto an existing EC-2 instance
- `reset-password` - reset password on a remote EC-2-instance via ansible
- `setup-ec2` - starts a new EC2 instance (based on an Ubuntu AMI)
- `setup-ec2-and-install-dependencies` - starts a new EC2 instance and install dependencies via Ansible
- `show-aws-assets` - show AWS entities associated with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__)

> - `start-test-release` - starts a Test Release flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `export-vm` - creates a new VM image from a running EC2-Instance
- `install-dependencies` - starts an ansible-installation onto an existing EC-2 instance
- `reset-password` - resets password on a remote EC-2-instance via ansible
- `setup-ec2` - starts a new EC2 instance (based on an Ubuntu AMI)
- `setup-ec2-and-install-dependencies` - starts a new EC2 instance and install dependencies via Ansible
- `show-aws-assets` - shows AWS entities associated with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__)
- `start-test-release` - starts a Test Release flow
```

- `setup-release-codebuild` - deploys the AWS Codebuild cloudformation stack which will be used for the release-build

## Flow

The following diagram shows the high-level steps to generate the images:  
![image info](./img/create-vm-overview.drawio.png)

### Setup EC2

Creates an EC2 instance based on an Ubuntu AMI via AWS Cloudformation. It also creates a new keypair dynamically.
After the export has finished, the cloudformation stack and the keypair is removed.

### Install

Installs all dependencies via Ansible:
- installs Poetry
- installs and configures Jupyter
- installs Docker and adds the user `ubuntu` to the docker group
- clones the script-languages-release repository
- changes the netplan configuration. This is necessary to have proper network configuration when running the VM image

Finally, the default password will be set, and also the password will be marked as expired, such that the user will be forced to enter a new password during initial login.
Also, the ssh password authentication will be enabled, and for security reasons the folder "~/.ssh" will be removed.

### Export

> The export creates first an AMI based on the running EC2 instance. After that, the AMI will be exported as VM image in the default formats to a S3 bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The export creates an AMI based on the running EC2 instance and exports the AMI as VM image in the default formats to a S3 bucket.
```

## Release

> The release executes in a AWS Codebuild job, the following diagram shows the flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release is executed in a AWS Codebuild job, the following diagram shows the flow.
```

![image info](./img/create-vm-release.drawio.png)

## Involved Cloudformation stacks

The following diagram shows the involved cloudformation stacks:
![image info](./img/cloudformation-stacks.drawio.png)

"DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-VM-SLC-BUCKET", "DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-CI-TEST-CODEBUILD" & "DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-RELEASE-CODEBUILD" are permanent and need to be deployed using the "deploy" commands (see [commands](#deployment-commands)).
The EC2-stack lives only during the creation of a new developer sandbox image.

## Tagging

> As all the involved resources might cause costs it's important to track all assets which were created during the execution of this project.
> All AWS entities (cloudformation stacks, AMI, EC2 key-pairs) are tagged/labeled with a specific keyword (calles __asset-id__) which allow tracking of them after creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of the involved resources might cause costs: cloudformation stacks, AMI, EC2 key-pairs.
To enable you to keep track of all these resources the implementation tags them after creation with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__).
```

> The S3 objects are identified by the prefix in the S3 bucket. Only the dynamically created entities are tagged with the asset-id, the permanent cloudformation stacks are not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The S3 objects are identified by the prefix in the S3 bucket. The command tags only the dynamically created entities with the asset-id but not the permanent cloudformation stacks.
```

> The command `show-aws-assets` can be used to get a list of all assets which were created during the execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the command `show-aws-assets` to get a list of all assets which were created during the execution.
```

Finally, the default password will be set, and also the password will be marked as expired, such that the user will be forced to enter a new password during initial login.
Also, the ssh password authentication will be enabled, and for security reasons the folder "~/.ssh" will be removed.

### Export

The export creates an AMI based on the running EC2 instance and exports the AMI as VM image in the default formats to a S3 bucket.

## Release

The release is executed in a AWS Codebuild job, the following diagram shows the flow.
![image info](./img/create-vm-release.drawio.png)

## Involved Cloudformation stacks

The following diagram shows the involved cloudformation stacks:
![image info](./img/cloudformation-stacks.drawio.png)

"DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-VM-SLC-BUCKET", "DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-CI-TEST-CODEBUILD" & "DEVELOPER-SANDBOX-RELEASE-CODEBUILD" are permanent and need to be deployed using the "deploy" commands (see [commands](#deployment-commands)).
The EC2-stack lives only during the creation of a new developer sandbox image.

## Tagging

Each of the involved resources might cause costs: cloudformation stacks, AMI, EC2 key-pairs.

> To enable you to keep track of all these resources the implementation tags them after creation with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable you to keep track of all these resources, the implementation tags them after creation with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__).
```

> ## Design Goals:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Design Goals
```

> script-languages-developer-sandbox use AWS as backend, because it provides the possibility to run the whole workflow during a ci-test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script-languages-developer-sandbox uses AWS as backend, because it provides the possibility to run the whole workflow during a ci-test.
```

## Tagging

Each of the involved resources might cause costs: cloudformation stacks, AMI, EC2 key-pairs.
To enable you to keep track of all these resources the implementation tags them after creation with a specific keyword (called __asset-id__).
The S3 objects are identified by the prefix in the S3 bucket. The command tags only the dynamically created entities with the asset-id but not the permanent cloudformation stacks.

> You can use the command `show-aws-assets` to get a list of all assets which were created during the execution.

Reviewer: Nice ✅ 👍
